[Music]
I'm going around the world giving talks
about Darwin and usually what I'm
talking about is Darwin's strange and
version of reasoning now that title that
phrase comes from a critic an early
critic and this is a passage that I just
love and would like to read for you in
the theory with which we have to deal
absolute ignorance is the artificer so
that we may enunciate it as the
fundamental principle of the whole
system that in order to make a perfect
and beautiful machine it is not
requisite to know how to make it this
proposition will be found on careful
examination to express in condensed form
the essential purport of the theory and
to express in a few words all mr.
Darwin's meaning who by a strange
inversion of reasoning seems to think
absolute ignorance fully qualified to
take the place of absolute wisdom in the
achievements of creative skill exactly
exactly and it is a strange inversion a
creationist pamphlet has this wonderful
page in it test - do you know of any
building that didn't have a builder yes
no do you know of any painting that
didn't have a painter yes no do you know
of any car that didn't have a maker yes
No
if you answered yes for any of the above
give details haha I mean it really is a
strange inversion of reasoning you would
have thought it stands to reason that
intelligent design requires an
intelligent designer but Darwin shows
that it's just false today though I'm
going to talk about Darwin's other a
strange inversion which is equally
puzzling at first but in some ways just
as important it stands to reason that we
love chocolate cake because it is sweet
guys go for girls like this because they
are sexy
we adore babies because they're so cute
and of course we are amused by jokes
because they are funny
this is all backwards it is
and Darwin shows us why let's start with
sweet our sweet tooth is basically an
evolved sugar detector because sugar is
high-energy and it's just been wired up
to the prefer to put it very crudely and
that's why we like sugar honey is sweet
because we like it not we like it
because honey is sweet there's nothing
intrinsically sweet about honey if you
looked at glucose molecules till you
were blind you wouldn't see why they
tasted sweet you have to look in our
brains to understand why they're sweet
so if you think first there was
sweetness and then we evolved to like
sweetness you've got it backwards that's
just wrong it's the other way around
sweetness was born with the wiring which
evolved and there's nothing
intrinsically sexy about these young
ladies and it's a good thing that there
isn't because if there were then mother
nature would have a problem how on earth
to get chimps to mate
now you might think ah there's a
solution hallucinations
that would be one way of doing it but
there's a quicker way just wire the
chimps up to love that look and
apparently they do that's all there is
to it over six million years we and the
chimps evolved our different ways we
became bald bodied oddly enough for one
reason or another they didn't if we
hadn't then probably this would be the
height of sexiness our sweet tooth is an
evolved instinctual preference for
high-energy food it wasn't designed for
chocolate cake chocolate cake is a super
normal stimulus the term is owed to Niko
Tinbergen who did his famous experiments
with gulls where he found that that
orange spot on the gulls beak if he made
a bigger oranger spot the gold chicks
would peck at it even harder it was a
hyper stimulus for them and they loved
it what we see with a chocolate cake is
it's a super normal stimulus to tweak
our design wiring and there are lots of
supernormal stimuli chocolate cake is
one there's lots of supernormal stimuli
for sexiness and there's even
supernormal stimuli for cuteness here's
a pretty good example it's important
that we love babies and that we not be
put off by a messy diapers so babies
have to have to attract our affection in
our and our nurturing and they do and by
the way a recent study shows that
mothers prefer the smell of the dirty
diapers of their own baby
so nature works on many levels here but
now if babies didn't look the way they
do if babies looked like this that's
what we would find adorable that's what
we would find we would think oh my
goodness do I ever want to hug that this
is the strange inversion well now
finally what about funny my answer is
it's the same story the same story this
is
hard one the one that isn't obvious
that's why I leave it to the end and I
won't be able to say too much about it
but you have to think evolutionarily you
have to think what hard job that has to
be done it's dirty work somebody's got
to do it it's so important to give us
such a powerful inbuilt reward for it
when we succeed now I think we found the
answer I and a few of my colleagues it's
a neural system that's wired up to
reward the brain for doing a grubby
clerical job our bumper sticker for this
view is that this is the joy of
debugging now I'm not gonna have time to
spell it all out but I'll just say there
are only some kinds of debugging get the
reward and what we're doing is we're
using humor as a sort of neuro
scientific probe by switching humor on
and off by turning the knob on a joke
now it's not funny oh now it's funnier
now we turn a little bit more now it's
not funny in this way we can actually
learn something about the architecture
of the brain the functional architecture
of the brain Matthew Hurley is the first
author of this we call it the Hurley
model he's a computer scientist Reginald
Adams is a psychologist and there I am
and we're putting this together into a
book thank you very much
[Applause]